So since we learned that inline styles are bad,
let's find a better alternative.
I remove the inline style and the first alternative I want to show you uses the head section, there
you can add a special style tag.
So it's a normal HTML tag with the name style and between the opening and closing selector, you can
now write so-called CSS rules.
Now a CSS rule in the end includes the same property value assignment we used on the section,
it just adds one extra thing because if you just write background
and then your color here like #ff1b68, of course CSS would have no chance of knowing what you
want to style with that color, you don't attach it directly to the element.
So what you need to add is a so-called selector. A selector simply is an additional piece of information
that tells CSS to which element in your DOM,
so inside of your body and the body is also treated as an element by the way, to which element you want
to assign this declaration,
so where you want to change the background in our case. You add a selector by simply typing the tag name
without the lower than and greater than signs,
so just section in our case,
then you add opening and closing curly braces to
now mark the part where you will set up the rules or the declarations for that given selector because
you can of course add multiple selectors for different elements on your page.
So in our case, I would grab that background code and put it inside of these curly braces
and now I'm telling CSS and CSS executes automatically,
it's run by the browser so to say, I tell it that it should look for all section elements on the page,
we only have one but it would actually use all and apply this style to all found instances,
so to all sections on the page.
So if I now save this and I reload the page, we don't actually see a difference
which makes sense because we still style this element but now no longer via inline styles
but by directly adding a style in our template or in our head section, like this.
Now as I mentioned, this applies to all sections.
So if you add a second section and we'll need one in our project later, if you add a second section
here and let's say in this section we have another h1 tag where we say choose your plan because
later this will be the part where users can select their hosting plan,
if we do this and we save the file and we reload, you see both sections actually have that style.
You also see there is some whitespace between them and around them, I will come back to why that is the
case later
but now you can already see that selector doing work,
you write the rule once and you select all sections.
That's another advantage compared to inline styles where you would have to add this declaration to each
section separately
and if you ever changed the color, you would have to change it in all these section styles,
so that is the better way for many reasons.
Now there is one other way of including styles though and that is using an external stylesheet,
so let's do that now.
For that I'll add a new file to the project,
you can create it in your Windows Explorer or Apple Mac Finder of course or directly in your IDE as I
do
and in that new file, we will store the CSS code, hence the file should end with .css because it
contains CSS code.
The name is up to you,
I will name it main because it refers to the main page of our web application, of our web page but you
can pick any name you want.
Now in that file, you write your CSS rules.
Remember, a rule is this part which is composed of a selector, a property and a value.
So you grab that rule and then you put it into that CSS file
without the style tags, that's important,
we're not in a HTML file, so we don't need style tags. With that added, we can remove the style
tags from the index.html file
and now we can save both files,
so the change the index.html file and the new main.css file. If we then go back to the running page
and we reload it,
you'll see the styles are gone
and do you have an idea why this is happening?
It of course happens because in our index.html file,
we never specify that we want to use or include this main.css file
and how would our browser know?
It doesn't automatically scan our file system and include every file it finds.
So we have to explicitly tell it to use the main.css file and we do so by adding a link element,
so normal link element as we use it for the favicon with rel set to stylesheet, to inform it that we're including
a stylesheet here and then the hyper reference added with the href attribute should point to that
file. If that file would live in a subfolder,
then you would add subfolder/filename
but since it's in the same folder here, we just put the file name, so main.css. If we now save
that index.html file and we reload, the styles are back because now we're including the styles
through our file here
and with that, you learn the third way of including CSS. This actually is the recommended way because by
using an extra stylesheet, you can have a clear separation of your HTML and your CSS code which is
especially useful as your CSS code grows and it would bloat your head section at some point
and additionally if you use the same stylesheet in multiple pages let's say, then your browser can cache
the stylesheet and doesn't need to re-download it for every new page, whereas if you include your styles
in the head section, you increase the file size of your HTML file and the browser needs to re-download it
since it's part of the HTML page for every new page which can be slower.
That is why in this course, we will use an external stylesheet
even if we only have one rule as in this case.